We are informed that Smith received the rudiments of education at the
grammar-school of Kirkaldy; and, at that time, attracted some notice by
his passion for books, and by the extraordinary powers of his memory. He
was also observed, even at this early period of life, to have contracted
those habits of absence in company, and of talking to himself, for which
he was afterwards so remarkable.

In 1737, he was sent to the university of Glasgow, where, it is said, he
evinced an uncommon partiality for the study of mathematics and natural
philosophy. Being designed for the English church, he left that place in
about three years, and entered, in 1740, an exhibitioner on Snell's
foundation, at Baliol college, Oxford. But to this celebrated seminary
he acknowledged very slender obligations. He had, however, attained a
solid foundation of knowledge, and also the precious habits of
attention, and the most industrious application. Here he diligently
pursued his favourite speculations in private, interrupted only by the
regular calls of scholastic discipline. He cultivated, with the greatest
assiduity and success, the study of the languages, both ancient and
modern; and formed an intimate acquaintance with the works of the poets
of his own country, as well as with those of Greece and Rome, France and
Italy. Of the turns and delicacies of the English tongue, it has been
observed, he then gained such a critical knowledge, as was scarcely to
be expected from his northern education. With the view of improving his
style, he employed himself in frequent translations, particularly from
the French; a practice which he used to recommend to all who cultivate
the art of writing. His modest deportment, and his secret studies,
however, provoked, it has been said, the jealousy or the suspicion of
his superiors. It has been mentioned, that the heads of the college
having thought proper to visit his chamber, found him engaged in
perusing Hume's Treatise of Human Nature, then recently published. This
the reverend inquisitors seized, while they severely reprimanded the
young philosopher.

After a residence of seven years at Oxford, he returned, against the
wishes of his friends, to Kirkaldy, the place of his nativity, where he
lived for some time with his mother, without determining on any fixed
plan of life; Mr. Smith having thus chosen to forego every prospect of
church preferment, rather than do violence to his conscience by
preaching a particular system of tenets.

In 1748, being then in the twenty-fifth year of his age, he took up his
residence in the capital of Scotland, when he first entered into public
life, by delivering lectures, under the patronage of Lord Kames, on
rhetoric and the belles lettres, which he continued for two years. These
lectures were never published; but the substance of them appears to have
been afterwards communicated to Dr. Blair, as he acknowledges, in his
Lectures, to have been indebted to Dr. Smith for a manuscript treatise,
from which he had taken several ideas in the eighteenth lecture, on the
general characters of style, particularly the plain and the simple; and
also the characters of those English authors belonging to the several
classes in that and the following lecture.

In 1751, he was chosen professor of logic in the university of Glasgow.
Of the manner in which he discharged the duties of this important
situation, it would be difficult now to present a more satisfactory
account than that which has been given by one of his own pupils 'In the
professorship of logic,' it is observed, 'Mr. Smith soon saw the
necessity of departing widely from the plan that had been followed by
his predecessors, and of directing the attention of his pupils to
studies of a more interesting and useful nature than the logic and
metaphysics of the schools. Accordingly, after exhibiting a general view
of the powers of the mind, and explaining so much of the ancient logic
as was requisite to gratify curiosity, with respect to an artificial
mode of reasoning, which had once occupied the universal attention of
the learned, he dedicated all the rest of his time to the delivery of a
system of rhetoric and belles lettres.'

During the following year, he was nominated professor of moral
philosophy in the same university. By this appointment he was peculiarly
gratified, and the duties of it he was well fitted to discharge, as it
embraced the study of his favourite science, political economy, many of
the doctrines of which, even then, had been familiarised to his mind.
After entering on the duties of his new situation, he appears to have
turned his attention to the division of the science of morals, which he
was induced to divide into four parts. The _first_ contained Natural
Theology, in which he considered the proofs of the being and attributes
of God, and those principles of the human mind upon which religion is
founded. The _second_ comprehended Ethics, strictly so called. In the
_third_, he treated, at more length, of that branch of morality which
relates to Justice, and which, being susceptible of precise and accurate
rules, is capable of a more systematic demonstration. In the _fourth_,
he examined these political regulations which are founded upon
Expediency, and which are calculated to increase the riches, the power,
and the prosperity of a state.

His lectures on these subjects were always distinguished by a luminous
division of the subject, and by fulness and variety of illustration; and
as they were delivered in a plain unaffected manner, they were well
calculated to afford pleasure as well as instruction. They, accordingly,
excited a degree of interest, and gave rise to a spirit of inquiry in
the great commercial city of Glasgow, from which the most favourable
consequences resulted. His reputation extended so widely, that, on his
account alone, a considerable number of students, from different parts
of the country, were attracted to the university of that city; and the
science which he taught became so popular, that even the trifling
peculiarities in his pronunciation and manner of speaking, were often
objects of imitation.

During the time Mr. Smith was thus successfully engaged in his
academical labours, he was gradually laying the foundation of a more
extensive reputation. In the year 1759, he published his 'Theory of
Moral Sentiments, or An Essay towards an Analysis of the Principles by
which Men naturally judge concerning the Conduct and Character, first of
their Neighbours, and afterwards of Themselves.' This work was founded
on the second division of his lectures, and was divided into six
parts:--The propriety of action: Merit and demerit, or the objects of
reward and punishment: The foundation of our judgments concerning our
own sentiments and conduct, and of the sense of duty: The effect of
utility upon the sentiment of approbation: The influence of custom and
fashion upon the sentiments of moral approbation and disapprobation:
And, lastly, The character of virtue. To these were added, a brief view
of the different systems of ancient and modern philosophy, which is
universally acknowledged to be the most candid and luminous that has yet
appeared.

This Essay soon attracted a great share of the public attention, by the
ingenuity of the reasonings, and the perspicuity with which they were
displayed. The principle on which it is founded may be said to be, That
the primary objects of our moral perceptions are the actions of other
men; and that our moral judgments, with respect to our own conduct, are
only applications to ourselves of decisions which we have already passed
on the conduct of others. With this doctrine the author thinks all the
most celebrated theories of morality coincide in part, and from some
partial view of it he apprehends they are all derived. To the same work
was subjoined a short treatise on the first formation of language, and
considerations on the different genius of those which were original and
compounded.

The Theory of Moral Sentiments, immediately on its publication, procured
a splendid reputation to the author, and led to a change in his
situation in life, that was to him no less pleasing in itself, than
gratifying from the means by which it was brought about. But the
following lively letter to him, at that time, from his friend Mr. Hume,
dated London, 12th April, 1759, will best show the manner in which this
work was received, and the influence which it had in deciding on the
future life of its author:--

  'I give you thanks for the agreeable present of your Theory.
  Wedderburn and I made presents of our copies to such of our
  acquaintances as we thought good judges, and proper to spread the
  reputation of the book. I sent one to the Duke of Argyll, to Lord
  Lyttleton, Horace Walpole, Soame Jenyns, and Burke, an Irish
  gentleman, who wrote lately a very pretty treatise on the sublime,
  Millar desired my permission to send one, in your name, to Dr.
  Warburton. I have delayed writing to you till I could tell you
  something of the success of the book, and could prognosticate, with
  some probability, whether it should be finally damned to oblivion, or
  should be registered in the temple of immortality. Though it has been
  published only a few weeks, I think there appear already such strong
  symptoms, that I can almost venture to foretel its fate. It is, in
  short, this----But I have been interrupted in my letter, by a foolish,
  impertinent visit of one who has lately come from Scotland. He tells
  me, that the university of Glasgow intend to declare Rouet's office
  vacant, upon his going abroad with Lord Hope. I question not but you
  will have our friend Fergusson in your eye, in case another project
  for procuring him a place in the university of Edinburgh should fail.
  Fergusson has very much polished and improved his treatise on
  Refinement, and with some amendments, it will make an admirable book,
  and discovers an elegant and a singular genius. The Epigoniad, I hope,
  will do; but it is somewhat up-hill work. As I doubt not but you
  consult the reviewers sometimes at present, you will see in the
  Critical Review a letter upon that poem, and I desire you to employ
  your conjectures in finding out the author. Let me see a sample of
  your skill in knowing hands, by your guessing at the person. I am
  afraid of Lord Kames's Law Tracts. A man might as well think of making
  a fine sauce by a mixture of wormwood and aloes, as an agreeable
  composition by joining metaphysics and Scotch law. However, the book,
  I believe, has merit, though few people will take the pains of diving
  into it. But to return to your book and its success in this town, I
  must tell you----A plague of interruptions! I ordered myself to be
  denied; and yet here is one that has broke in upon me again. He is a
  man of letters, and we have had a good deal of literary conversation.
  You told me that you was curious of literary anecdotes, and therefore
  I shall inform you of a few that have come to my knowledge. I believe
  I have mentioned to you already Helvetius's book _De l'Esprit_. It is
  worth your reading, not for its philosophy, which I do not highly
  value, but for its agreeable composition. I had a letter from him a
  few days ago, wherein he tells me that my name was much oftener in the
  manuscript, but that the censor of books at Paris obliged him to
  strike it out. Voltaire has lately published a small work, called
  _Candide, ou l'Optimisme_ I shall give a detail of it----But what is
  all this to my book? say you.----My dear Mr. Smith, have patience;
  compose yourself to tranquillity; show yourself a philosopher in
  practice as well as profession; think on the emptiness, and rashness,
  and futility of the common judgments of men; how little they are
  regulated by reason in any subject, much more in philosophical
  subjects, which so far exceed the comprehension of the vulgar.

      ----Non si quid turbida Roma
    Elevat, accedas; examenve improbum in illa
    Castiges trutina; nec te quæsiveris extra.

  A wise man's kingdom is his own breast, or if he ever looks farther,
  it will only be to the judgment of a select few, who are free from
  prejudices, and capable of examining his work. Nothing, indeed, can
  be a stronger presumption of falsehood than the approbation of the
  multitude; and Phocion, you know, always suspected himself of some
  blunder when he was attended with the applauses of the populace.

  'Supposing, therefore, that you have duly prepared yourself for the
  worst, by all these reflections, I proceed to tell you the melancholy
  news,--that your book has been very unfortunate; for the public seem
  disposed to applaud it extremely. It was looked for by the foolish
  people with some impatience and the mob of literati are beginning
  already to be very loud in its praises. Three bishops called
  yesterday at Millar's shop, in order to buy copies, and to ask
  questions about the author. The bishop of Peterborough said he had
  passed the evening in a company where he heard it extolled above all
  books in the world. The Duke of Argyll is more decisive than he uses
  to be in its favour I suppose he either considers it as an exotic, or
  thinks the author will be serviceable to him in the Glasgow
  elections. Lord Lyttleton says, that Robertson, and Smith, and Bower,
  are the glories of English literature. Oswald protests, he does not
  know whether he has reaped more instruction or entertainment from it.
  But you may easily judge what reliance can be put on his judgment,
  who has been engaged all his life in public business, and who never
  sees any faults in his friends. Millar exults, and brags that two
  thirds of the edition are already sold, and that he is now sure of
  success. You see what a son of the earth that is, to value books only
  by the profit they bring him. In that view, I believe, it may prove a
  very good book.

  'Charles Townsend, who passes for the cleverest fellow in England, is
  so taken with the performance, that he said to Oswald, he would put
  the Duke or Buccleugh under the author's care, and would make it
  worth his while to accept of that charge. As soon as I heard this,
  I called on him twice with a view of talking with him about the
  matter, and of convincing him of the propriety of sending that young
  nobleman to Glasgow; for I could not hope, that he could offer you
  any terms which would tempt you to renounce your professorship. But I
  missed him. Mr. Townsend passes for being a little uncertain in his
  resolutions; so, perhaps, you need not build much on this sally.

  'In recompense for so many mortifying things, which nothing but truth
  could have extorted from me, and which I could easily have multiplied
  to a greater number, I doubt not but you are so good a christian as
  to return good for evil, and to flatter my vanity, by telling me,
  that all the godly in Scotland abuse me for my account of John Knox
  and the reformation.'

Mr. Smith having completed, and given to the world his system of ethics,
that subject afterwards occupied but a small part of his lectures. His
attention was now chiefly directed to the illustration of those other
branches of science which he taught; and, accordingly, he seems to have
taken up the resolution, even at that early period, of publishing an
investigation into the principles of what he considered to be the only
other branch of Moral Philosophy,--Jurisprudence, the subject of which
formed the third division of his lectures. At the conclusion of the
Theory of Moral Sentiments, after treating of the importance of a system
of Natural Jurisprudence, and remarking that Grotius was the first, and
perhaps the only writer, who had given any thing like a system of those
principles which ought to run through, and be the foundation of the law
of nations, Mr. Smith promised, in another discourse, to give an account
of the general principles of law and government, and of the different
revolutions they have undergone in the different ages and periods of
society, not only in what concerns justice, but in what concerns police,
revenue, and arms, and whatever else is the object of law.

Four years after the publication of this work, and after a residence of
thirteen years in Glasgow, Mr. Smith, in 1763, was induced to relinquish
his professorship, by an invitation from the Hon. Mr. Townsend, who had
married the Duchess of Buccleugh, to accompany the young Duke, her son,
in his travels. Being indebted for this invitation to his own talents
alone, it must have appeared peculiarly flattering to him. Such an
appointment was, besides, the more acceptable, as it afforded him a
better opportunity of becoming acquainted with the internal policy of
other states, and of completing that system of political economy, the
principles of which he had previously delivered in his lectures, and
which it was then the leading object of his studies to perfect.

Mr. Smith did not, however, resign his professorship till the day after
his arrival in Paris, in February 1764. He then addressed the following
letter to the Right Honourable Thomas Millar, lord advocate of Scotland,
and then rector of the college of Glasgow:--

  'MY LORD,--I take this first opportunity after my arrival in this
  place, which was not till yesterday, to resign my office into the
  hands of your lordship, of the dean of faculty, of the principal of
  the college, and of all my other most respectable and worthy
  colleagues. Into your and their hands, therefore, I do resign my
  office of professor of moral philosophy in the university of Glasgow,
  and in the college thereof, with all the emoluments, privileges, and
  advantages, which belong to it. I reserve, however, my right to the
  salary for the current half-year, which commenced at the 10th of
  October, for one part of my salary, and at Martinmas last for
  another; and I desire that this salary may be paid to the gentleman
  who does that part of my duty which I was obliged to leave undone, in
  the manner agreed on between my very worthy colleagues before we
  parted. I never was more anxious for the good of the college than at
  this moment; and I sincerely wish, that whoever is my successor, he
  may not only do credit to the office by his abilities, but be a
  comfort to the very excellent men with whom he is likely to spend his
  life, by the probity of his heart and the goodness of his temper.'

His lordship having transmitted the above to the professors, a meeting
was held; on which occasion the following honourable testimony of the
sense they entertained of the worth of their former colleague was
entered in their minutes:--

  'The meeting accept of Dr. Smith's resignation in terms of the above
  letter; and the office of professor of moral philosophy in this
  university is therefore hereby declared to be vacant. The university
  at the same time, cannot help expressing their sincere regret at the
  removal of Dr. Smith, whose distinguished probity and amiable
  qualities procured him the esteem and affection of his colleagues;
  whose uncommon genius, great abilities, and extensive learning, did
  so much honour to this society. His elegant and ingenious Theory of
  Moral Sentiments having recommended him to the esteem of men of taste
  and literature throughout Europe, his happy talents in illustrating
  abstracted subjects, and faithful assiduity in communicating useful
  knowledge, distinguished him as a professor, and at once afforded the
  greatest pleasure, and the most important instruction, to the youth
  under his care.'

In the first visit that Mr. Smith and his noble pupil made to Paris,
they only remained ten or twelve days; after which, they proceeded to
Thoulouse, where, during a residence of eighteen months, Mr. Smith had
an opportunity of extending his information concerning the internal
policy of France, by the intimacy in which he lived with some of the
members of the parliament. After visiting several other places in the
south of France, and residing two months at Geneva, they returned about
Christmas to Paris. Here Mr. Smith ranked among his friends many of the
highest literary characters, among whom were several of the most
distinguished of those political philosophers who were denominated
Economists.

Before Mr. Smith left Paris, he received a flattering letter from the
unfortunate Duke of Rochefoucault, with a copy of a new edition of the
Maxims of his grandfather. Notwithstanding the unfavourable manner in
which the opinions of the author of that work were mentioned in the
Theory of Moral Sentiments, the Duke informed Mr. Smith, on this
occasion, that he had been prevented only from finishing a translation,
which he had begun, of his estimable system of morals, into French, by
the knowledge of having been anticipated in the design. He also
observed, that some apology might be made for his ancestor, when it was
considered, that he formed his opinions of mankind in two of the worst
situations of life,--a court and a camp. The last communication Mr.
Smith had with this nobleman was in 1789, when he gave him to
understand, that he would no longer rank the name of Rochefoncault with
that of the author of the Fable of the Bees; and, accordingly, in the
first edition that was afterwards published of the Theory of Moral
Sentiments, this promised alteration was made.

The next ten years of his life, after his arrival from the continent,
Mr. Smith passed with his mother at Kirkaldy, though he occasionally,
during that time, visited London and Edinburgh. Mr. Hume, who considered
a town as the proper scene for a man of letters, made many attempts to
prevail on him to leave his retirement.

At length, in the beginning of the year 1776, Mr. Smith accounted to the
world for his long retreat, by the publication of his 'Inquiry into the
Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.' This work chiefly
comprehended the subject of the fourth and last division of his
lectures, namely, those political regulations that have their origin in
expediency. For about twenty years of his life, his attention had been
chiefly devoted to the study of subjects connected with the science of
political economy. His long residence in the mercantile city of Glasgow
afforded him opportunities of deriving information, in many particulars,
from the best sources; his travels on the continent contributed to
extend his knowledge, and correct many of those misapprehensions of life
and manners which the best descriptions of them are found to convey; and
the intimacy in which he lived with some of the leaders of the sect of
economists, and other writers on the subject of political economy, could
not fail to assist him in methodizing his speculations, and of adding to
the soundness of his conclusions.--After his arrival in this country, he
wanted nothing more than leisure, to arrange his materials, and prepare
them for publication: and for this purpose he passed in retirement the
subsequent ten years.

The great aim of Mr. Smith's Inquiry, the fruit of so much research, and
the work of so many years, is, as Professor Stewart observes, to direct
the policy of nations with respect to one most important class of its
laws,--those which form its system of political economy: 'and he has
unquestionably,' the same eloquent writer adds, 'had the merit of
presenting to the world the most comprehensive and perfect work that has
yet appeared on the general principles of any branch of legislation.'

'A great and leading object of Mr. Smith's speculations,' as Mr. Stewart
also observes, 'is to demonstrate, that the most effectual plan for
advancing a people to greatness, is to maintain that order of things
which nature has pointed out, by allowing every man, as long as he
observes the rules of justice, to pursue his own interest in his own
way, and to bring both his industry and his capital into the freest
competition with these of his fellow citizens.'

Several authors, in this country, had before written on commercial
affairs, but Mr. Smith was the first who reduced to a regular form and
order the information that was to be obtained on that subject, and
deduced from it the policy which an enlightened commercial nation ought
to adopt. The successful manner in which he has treated this unlimited
freedom of trade, as well as some others, and his able exposure of the
errors of the commercial system, have rendered the science of which he
treats highly interesting to the great body of the people; and a spirit
of inquiry, on every branch of political economy, has, in consequence,
been excited, which promises now, more than ever, to be attended with
the most beneficial effects. This intricate science, the most important
to the interests of mankind though long neglected, Dr. Smith has had the
merit of advancing so far, as to lay a foundation, on which, it may
safely be said, investigation may for a long time proceed.

It has frequently been alleged, that Dr. Smith was indebted for a large
portion of the reasonings in his Inquiry to the French economists, and
that the coincidence between some branches of his doctrine and theirs,
particularly those which relate to freedom of trade and the powers of
labour, is more than casual. But Professor Stewart has ably vindicated
him from this charge, and established his right to the general
principles of his doctrine, which, he thinks, were altogether original,
and the result of his own reflections. That he, however, derived some
advantage from his intimacy with Turgot, and those great men who were at
the head of the sect of economists, and, perhaps, adopted some of their
illustrations, it would be as unnecessary to deny, as it would he far
from discreditable to his talents to acknowledge.

There is also a similar, or perhaps a greater coincidence between many
parts of his doctrine and the opinions of Sir James Stewart, as detailed
in his 'Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy.' This
congruity of opinion is chiefly apparent in their respective conclusions
concerning the effects of competition,--the principles of exchangeable
value,--the relation between the interest of money and the profit of
stock,--the functions of coin,--the rise and progress of credit,--and
the sources and limits of taxation. As this author had published his
Inquiry many years before Dr. Smith's work appeared, and had, besides,
lived in great intimacy with him, there was some reason to believe, what
has been often asserted, that he possessed a just claim to some of the
doctrines contained in that work, though Dr. Smith never once mentioned
his name in any part of his work. But the present Sir James Stewart, who
has recently published a full edition of the writings of his father,
relinquishes, on his part, all such pretensions. With the partiality of
a friend, in ranking his father with Dr. Smith, he gives it as his
opinion, however, that both had, with original powers of equal strength,
drawn their knowledge from the same source, the French economists.

Dr. Mandeville has also, of late, got the credit of being the author of
those Principles of Political Economy, which have interested the world
for the last fifty years, and to him alone, it is said, not only the
English, but also the French writers, are indebted for their doctrines
in that science. In the work of this eccentric writer, there seems,
indeed, a similarity of opinion on some of the more obvious sources of
wealth, particularly in the division of labour, which Dr. Smith
investigates so fully; and in the erroneous doctrine of productive and
non-productive labour; and also, perhaps, on some other points: but it
would be difficult to show, that he ought, on this account, to be
considered the author of all, or even the chief part of what has been
written on the subject. On this, as well as on all questions of a
similar nature, a great diversity of opinions will subsist. But it may
be a matter of curiosity to those who are unacquainted with his work,
the Fable of the Bees, not only to trace the connection of that author's
sentiments with what is advanced by subsequent writers on this important
subject, but also to learn his peculiar notions of morality, that
attracted, at one time, so much attention. These last, Dr. Smith says,
though described by a lively and humorous, yet coarse and rustic
eloquence, which throws an air of truth and probability on them, are,
almost in every respect, erroneous.

Soon after the publication of the Wealth of Nations, Mr. Smith received
the following congratulatory letter from Mr. Hume, six months before his
death, dated Edinburgh, 1st April 1776.

  '_Euge! Belle!_ Dear Mr. Smith--I am much pleased with your
  performance, and the perusal of it has taken me from a state of great
  anxiety. It was a work of so much expectation, by yourself, by your
  friends, and by the public, that I trembled for its appearance; but
  am now much relieved; not but that the reading of it necessarily
  requires so much attention, and the public is disposed to give so
  little, that I shall still doubt for some time of its being at first
  very popular. But it has depth, and solidity, and acuteness, and is
  so much illustrated by curious facts, that it must at last take the
  public attention. It is probably much improved by your last abode in
  London. If you were here at my fireside, I should dispute some of
  your principles. But these, and a hundred other points, are fit, only
  to be discussed in conversation. I hope it will be soon, for I am in
  a very bad state of health, and cannot afford a long delay.'

The publication of this great work drew praise to its author, indeed,
from many different quarters.--Dr. Barnard, in a political epistle,
addressed to Sir Joshua Reynolds, where the characteristic qualities of
some eminent literary men of that time are brought forward, spoke of
Smith as one who would teach him how to think. Gibbon made honourable
mention of him in his Roman history; and Mr. Fox contributed, in no
small degree, to extend his reputation, by observing in the House of
Commons, that 'the way, as my learned friend Dr. Adam Smith says, for a
nation, as well as an individual, to be rich, is for both to live within
their income.'

The opinion which Dr. Johnson delivered, at that time, on its being
alleged by Sir John Pringle, that a person who, like Dr. Smith, was not
practically acquainted with trade, could not be qualified to write on
that subject, may also be mentioned here, though somewhat erroneous, as
far as it respects the received doctrines of Political Economy:--'He is
mistaken,' said Johnson. 'A man who has never been engaged in trade
himself, may undoubtedly write well on trade; and there is nothing which
requires more to be illustrated by philosophy than trade does. As to
mere wealth, that is to say, money, it is clear that one nation, or one
individual, cannot increase its store but by making another poorer; but
trade procures what is more valuable, the reciprocation of the peculiar
advantages of different countries. A merchant seldom thinks of any but
his own trade. To write a good book upon it, a man must have extensive
views. It is not necessary to have practised, to write well upon a
subject.'[2]

On the Inquiry into the Causes of the Wealth of Nations, it only remains
farther to be observed, that its success has been every way commensurate
to its merits. It has, however, been often regretted, that the author
did not live to favour the world with his reasonings on those important
events which have taken place since 1784, when he put the last hand to
his invaluable work. That another, with competent talents, and a mind
disposed to the task, should soon appear, to treat of these occurrences,
and give a satisfactory view of the progress of the science from that
time to the present, is not to be expected. But as the honour to be
gained from a successful execution of such an undertaking is very
considerable, it is not to be wondered at that an attempt of this kind
should be made. Accordingly, Mr Playfair of London has had the boldness
to follow Smith, by endeavouring to supply, in part, this desideratum,
by adding supplementary chapters and notes to the Treatise on the Wealth
of Nations.

But it is greatly to be feared, that there are few persons who have read
this improved edition, as it is called, of Dr. Smith's Inquiry, but will
still look forward to the accomplishment of the wishes they must
previously have formed, for a continuation, and probably an
illustration, of the discussions contained in that work. Leaving,
therefore, the supplementary chapters and elucidations of Mr Playfair,
it must be observed, that Dr. Smith has, on this occasion, been equally
unfortunate in a biographer. The detail of his peaceful life is almost
lost among dissertations on the wickedness of atheism and the horrors of
a revolution. But these dissertations, strangely misplaced as they
appear to be, would certainly not alone have been sufficient to attract
observation here, whatever latitude the author might have allowed to
himself on such subjects. When he goes on, however, to apologise for Dr.
Smith's acquaintance with some individuals among the economists, and to
connect the whole of that sect with those philosophers to whom he
ascribes the evils which have so long afflicted France, his opinions
become still more insupportable. It will, perhaps, be said, and with
some reason, that, in this instance, at least, the writer has followed
those alarmists, who, on any men of learning belonging to that country
being mentioned, immediately ally them to the revolutionists without
regard to difference of opinion, or distance of time.

The reputation, however, of the economists is too well established to be
affected, either by the clamours of the ignorant, or the mad
intemperance of political alarmists. The doctrine of the great men who
formed the school of the economists, was, that the produce of the land
is the sole or principal source of the revenue and wealth of every
country; and this doctrine, with the manner of deriving from it the
greatest possible advantage, it is almost universally acknowledged,
engaged entirely their attention. Dr. Smith, who lived in great
intimacy with many of the founders of that sect, does ample justice, on
every occasion, to the purity of their views; and indeed they, as well
as himself, it has always been said, by the impartial and well informed,
were ever animated by a zeal for the best interests of society.

M. Quesnai, the first of that sect, and the author of the Economical
Table, a work of the greatest profoundness and originality, was, in
particular, represented by Mr. Smith as a man of the greatest modesty
and simplicity; and his system he pronounced, with all its
imperfections, to be the nearest approximation to the truth, of any that
had then been published on the principles of political science. His
veneration for this worthy man was even so great, that had he lived, it
was his intention to have inscribed to him the Inquiry into the Causes
of the Wealth of Nations.

Nor will the memory of those illustrious men be soon forgotten,
notwithstanding the calumnies with which it has been charged. It may
safely be predicted, in the words of a highly respectable periodical
publication, that 'Those prospects of political improvements which
flattered the benevolent anticipations of the economists, will soon be
recognised as sound conclusions of science; and it will at length be
acknowledged that Turgot, Mirabeau, and Quesnai, were the friends of
mankind, and that their genius and their labours were devoted to the
refinement of social happiness and the consolidation of the political
fabric.'[3]

The life of Mr. Smith, after the publication of his Inquiry, might be
said to draw towards a close. The following particulars of the last
years, are mostly extracted from Professor Stewart's Life of this
incomparable writer.

After residing some time in London, he was appointed one of the
commissioners of customs in Scotland, in 1778, when he removed to
Edinburgh. He was accompanied by his mother, who, though in extreme old
age, possessed a considerable share of good health; and his cousin, Miss
Douglass, who had long resided with him at Glasgow, undertook to
superintend his domestic economy.

The Duke of Buccleugh had continued to allow Mr. Smith L.300 a-year, and
the accession which he now received to his income enabled him to live,
not only with comfort and independence, but to indulge the benevolence
of his heart, in making numerous private benefactions.

During the remaining period of his life, he appears to have done little
more than to discharge, with peculiar exactness, the duties of his
office, which, though they required no great exertion, were sufficient
to divert his attention from his studies. He very early felt the
infirmities of old age, but his health and strength were not greatly
affected till he was left alone, by the death of his mother, in 1784,
and of his cousin four years after. They had been the objects of his
affection for more than sixty years; and in their society he had
enjoyed, from his infancy, all that he ever knew of the endearments of a
family. In return for the anxious and watchful solicitude of his mother
during infancy, he had the singular good fortune of being able to show
his gratitude to her during a very long life; and it was often observed,
that the nearest avenue to his heart was through his mother.

He now gradually declined till the period of his death, which happened
in 1790. His last illness, which arose from a chronic obstruction in the
bowels, was lingering and painful; but he had every consolation to
soothe it which he could desire, from the tenderest sympathy of his
friends, and from the completest resignation of his own mind.

His friends had been in use to sup with him every Sunday. The last time
he received them, which was a few days before his death, there was a
pretty numerous meeting; but not being able to sit up as usual, he
retired to bed before supper. On going away, he took leave of the
company, by saying, 'I believe we must adjourn this meeting to some
other place.'

In a letter addressed, in the year 1787, to the principal of the
university of Glasgow, in consequence of his being elected rector of
that learned body, a pleasing memorial remains of the satisfaction with
which he always recollected that period of his literary career, which
had been more peculiarly consecrated to his academical studies. On that
occasion he writes:--

  'No preferment could have given me so much real satisfaction. No man
  can owe greater obligations to a society than I do to the university
  of Glasgow. They educated me; they sent me to Oxford. Soon after my
  return to Scotland, they elected me one of their own members, and
  afterwards preferred me to another office, to which the abilities and
  virtues of the never-to-be-forgotten Dr. Hutcheson had given a
  superior degree of illustration. The period of thirteen years, which
  I spent as a member of that society, I remember as by far the most
  useful, and therefore, as by far the happiest and most honourable
  period of my life; and now, after three-and-twenty years absence, to
  be remembered in so very agreeable a manner by my old friends and
  protectors, gives me a heart-felt joy which I cannot easily express
  to you.'

Not long before the death of Smith, finding his end approach rapidly, he
gave orders to destroy all his manuscripts, excepting some detached
essays, which he entrusted to the care of his executors. With the
exception of these essays, all his papers were committed to the flames.
What were the particular contents of these papers was not known, even to
his most intimate friends. The additions to the Theory of Moral
Sentiments, most of which were composed under severe illness, had
fortunately been sent to the press in the beginning of the preceding
winter; and the author lived to see the publication of this new
edition.[4]

Some time before his last illness, when he had occasion to go to London,
he enjoined his friends, to whom he had entrusted the disposal of his
manuscripts, to destroy, in the event of his death, all the volumes of
his lectures, doing with the rest what they pleased. When he had become
weak, and saw the last period of his life approach, he spoke to his
friends again upon the same subject. They entreated him to make his mind
easy, as he might depend upon their fulfilling his desire. Though he
then seemed to be satisfied, he, some days afterwards, begged that the
volume might be immediately destroyed; which was accordingly done.

Mr. Riddell, an intimate friend of Mr. Smith, mentions, that on one of
these occasions he regretted he had done so little; 'but I meant,' he
added, 'to have done more; and there are materials in my papers of which
I could make a great deal.--But that is now out of the question.'

That the idea of destroying such unfinished works as might be in his
possession at the time of his death, was not the effect of any sudden or
hasty resolution, appears from the following letter to Mr. Hume, written
in 1773, at the time when he was preparing for a journey to London, with
the prospect of a pretty long absence from Scotland.

  'My dear friend,--As I have left the care of all my literary papers
  to you, I must tell you, that except those which I carry along with
  me, there are none worth the publication, but a fragment of a great
  work, which contains a history of the astronomical systems that were
  successively in fashion down to the time of Descartes. Whether that
  might not be published as a fragment of an intended juvenile work, I
  leave entirely to your judgment, though I begin to suspect myself,
  that there is more refinement than solidity in some parts of it. This
  little work you will find in a thin folio paper book in my back-room.
  All the other loose papers which you will find in that desk, or
  within the glass folding-doors of a bureau, which stands in my
  bed-room, together with about eighteen thin paper folio books, which
  you will likewise find within the same glass folding doors, I desire
  may be destroyed without any examination. Unless I die very suddenly,
  I shall take care that the papers I carry with me shall he carefully
  sent to you.'

But he himself long survived his friend Mr. Hume. The persons entrusted
with his remaining papers were Dr. Black and Dr. Hutton, his executors,
with whom he had long lived in habits of the closest friendship. These
gentlemen afterwards collected into a volume, such of the writings of
Dr. Smith as were fitted for publication: and they appeared in 1795,
under the title of _Essays on Philosophical Subjects_. These essays had
been composed early in life, and were designed to illustrate the
principles of the human mind, by a theoretical deduction of the progress
of the sciences and the liberal arts. The most considerable piece in
this volume is, on the principles which lead and direct philosophical
inquiries, illustrated by the history of astronomy, ancient physics, and
ancient logic and metaphysics. The others, with the exception of an
essay on the external senses, relate to the imitative and liberal arts.
The contents of this volume, Mr. Smith's executors observe, appear to be
parts of a plan he once had formed for giving a connected history of the
liberal sciences and elegant arts; but which he had been obliged to
abandon, as being far too extensive; and these parts lay beside him
neglected till after his death. In them, however, will be found that
happy connection, that full and accurate expression, and the same
copiousness and facility of illustration, which are conspicuous in the
rest of his writings.

As a writer, the character of Mr. Smith is so well known, that any
observation on his merits, must appear almost unnecessary. His literary
fame is circumscribed by no ordinary limits. To the voice of his own
country, is added the testimony of Europe, and, indeed, of the civilized
world. And had even only one volume of his inestimable writings
appeared, his name would have been carried down to posterity in the
first rank of those illustrious characters that adorn the last century.

In the words of Professor Stewart, it may be said, that,--of the
intellectual gifts and attainments by which he was so eminently
distinguished;--of the originality and comprehensiveness of his views;
the extent, the variety, and the correctness of his information; the
inexhaustible fertility of his invention; and the ornaments which his
rich and beautiful imagination had borrowed from classical culture;--he
has left behind him lasting monuments.

One observation more may he added to what is now said on his writings,
that, whatever be the nature of his subject, he seldom misses an
opportunity of indulging his curiosity, in tracing, from the principles
of human nature, or from the circumstances of society, the origin of the
opinions and the institutions which he describes.

With regard to the private character of this amiable and enlightened
philosopher, it fortunately happens, that the most certain of all
testimonies to his private worth may be found in the confidence,
respect, and attachment which followed him through all the various
relations of life. There were many peculiarities, indeed, both in his
manners and in his intellectual habits; but to those who knew him, these
peculiarities, so far from detracting from the respect which his
abilities commanded, added an irresistible charm to his conversation,
and strongly displayed the artless simplicity of his heart. The
comprehensive speculations with which he had always been occupied, and
the variety of materials which his own invention continually supplied to
his thoughts, rendered him habitually inattentive to familiar objects,
and to common occurrences. On this account, he was remarkable,
throughout the whole of life, for speaking to himself when alone, and
for being so absent in company, as, on some occasions, to exceed almost
what the fancy of a Bruyere could imagine. In company, he was apt to be
engrossed by his studies; and appeared, at times, by the motion of his
lips, as well as by his looks and gestures, to be in the fervour of
composition. It was observed, that he rarely started a topic himself, or
even fell in easily with the common dialogue of conversation. When he
did speak, however, he was somewhat apt to convey his ideas in the form
of a lecture; but this never proceeded from a wish to engross the
discourse, or to gratify his vanity. His own inclination disposed him so
strongly to enjoy, in silence, the gaiety of those around him, that his
friends were often led to concert little schemes, in order to bring on
the subjects most likely to interest him.




SHORT VIEW

OF THE

DOCTRINE OF SMITH, COMPARED WITH THAT OF THE FRENCH ECONOMISTS.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH OF M. GARNIER.


The ancient philosophers were little accustomed to employ themselves in
the observation of those laws which regulate the distribution of riches
among the different orders of society in a nation, or in the search
after the sources of the increase of its wealth. In fact, political
economy is a science of very modern origin; for although, towards the
end of the seventeenth century, several writers, both of France and
England, had begun to discuss the comparative advantages of agriculture
and commerce, yet it was not till the middle of the eighteenth, that any
thing like a complete system appeared upon the growth and distribution
of national wealth. At this period, the philosophical Quesnai directed
his attention to this very abstract subject, and became the founder of a
celebrated school, which may boast among its adherents many
distinguished men of talents and extensive knowledge.

All philosophical sects owe their first origin and foundation to the
discovery of some great truth; and it is the madness inspiring their
members, to deduce every thing from this new discovery, that contributes
most to their downfal. Thus it was with the economists. They saw that
the original source of all wealth was the soil, and that the labour of
its cultivation produced not only the means of subsisting the labourer,
but also a neat surplus, which went to the increase of the existing
stock: while, on the other hand, the labour applied to the productions
of the earth, the labour of manufactures and commerce, can only add to
the material a value exactly equal to that expended during the execution
of the work; by which means, in the end, this species of labour operates
no real change on the total sum of national riches. They perceived that
the landed proprietors are the first receivers of the whole wealth of
the community; and that, whatever is consumed by those who are not
possessed of land, must come, directly or indirectly, from the former;
and hence, that these receive wages from the proprietors, and that the
circulation of national wealth, is, in fact, only a succession of
exchanges between these two classes of men, the proprietors furnishing
their wealth, and the non-proprietors giving as an equivalent their
labour and industry. They perceived that a tax, being a portion of the
national wealth applied to public use, in every instance, however
levied, bears finally upon the landed proprietors, inasmuch as they are
the distributors of that wealth, either by retrenching their luxuries,
or by loading them with an additional expense; and that, therefore,
every tax which is not levied directly on the rude produce of the earth,
falls in the end on the landed proprietors, with a surplus produce, from
which the amount of the revenue receives no addition.

These assertions are almost all incontestible, and capable of a rigorous
demonstration; and those who have attempted to shew their falsity, have,
in general, opposed them only with idle sophistry. Why, then, has this
doctrine met with so little success, and why does every day diminish its
reputation? because it agrees in no one point with the moral condition,
either of societies or of individuals; because it is continually
contradicted by experience, and by the infallible instinct of
self-interest; because it does not possess that indispensible sanction
of all truths, utility. In fact, of what consequence is it, that the
labour of agriculture produces not only what covers its own expenses,
but new beings which would never have existed without it, and that it
has this advantage over the labour of manufactures and commerce? Does it
by any means follow from this, that the former kind of labour is more
profitable to the community than the latter? The real essence of all
wealth, and that which determines its value, is the necessity under
which the consumer lies to purchase it; for, in truth, there is no such
thing as wealth properly so called, nor absolute value; but the words
wealth and value are really nothing more than the co-relatives of
consumption and demand. Even the necessaries of life, in a country which
is inhabited, but incapable of commercial intercourse, will not form
wealth; and to whatever degree of civilization that country may have
reached, still the same principle will hold without alteration. If the
sum of national wealth shall in any case have exceeded the sum of
demands, then a part of the former sum will cease to bear the name of
wealth, and will again be without value. In vain, then, will agriculture
multiply her produce; for the instant that it exceeds the bounds of
actual consumption, a part will lose its value; and self-interest, that
prime director of all labour and industry, seeing herself thus deceived
in her expectations, will not fail to turn her activity and efforts to
another quarter.

In almost every instance, it is an idle refinement to distinguish
between the labour of those employed in agriculture, and of those
employed in manufactures and commerce; for wealth is necessarily the
result of both descriptions of labour, and consumption can no more take
place independently of the one, than it can independently of the other.
It is by their simultaneous concurrence that any thing becomes
consumable, and, of course, that it comes to constitute wealth. How then
are we entitled to compare their respective products, since it is
impossible to distinguish these in the joint product, and thus
appreciate the separate value of each? The value of growing wheat
results as much from the industry of the reaper who gathers it in, of
the thrasher who separates it from the chaff and straw, of the miller
and baker who convert it successively into flour and bread, as it does
from that of the ploughman and of the sower. Without the labour of the
weaver, the raw material of flax would lose all its value, and be
regarded as no way superior to the most useless weed that grows. What
then can we gain by any attempts to determine which of these two species
of labour conduces most to the advancement of national wealth; or, are
they not as idle, as if we busied ourselves in inquiring, whether the
right or the left foot is the most useful in walking?

It is true, indeed, that in every species of manufacture, the workman
adds to the value of the raw material a value exactly equal to that
which was expended during the process of manufacture; and what is the
conclusion we are to draw this? It is merely, that a certain exchange
has taken place and that the food consumed by the manufacturer is now
represented by the increase of value resulting from his manual labour.
Thus wool, when converted into cloth, has gained a value precisely equal
to that expended by the manufacturer during the conversion. But, if it
is shown that, without this exchange, the wool would have remained
without value, while, on the other hand, the food of the manufacturer
would have been without a consumer; it will then appear, that this
exchange has, in fact, done what is equivalent to creating these two
values, and that it has proved to the society an operation infinitely
more useful, than if an equal quantity of labour had been spent in the
increase of that rude produce, which already existed in overabundance.
The first description of labour has been truly productive; while the
last would have been altogether unproductive, since it would not have
created any value.

'The soil,' say the economists, 'is the source of all wealth.' But, to
prevent this assertion from leading us into erroneous conclusions, it
will be necessary to explain it. The materials of all wealth originate
primarily in the bosom of the earth; but it is only by the aid of labour
that they can ever truly constitute wealth. The earth furnishes the
means of wealth; but wealth itself cannot possibly have any existence,
unless through that industry and labour which modifies, divides,
connects, and combines the various productions of the soil, so as to
render them fit for consumption. Commerce, indeed, regards those rude
productions as real wealth; but it is only from the consideration, that
the proprietor has it always in his power to convert them, at will, into
consumable goods, by submitting them to the necessary operations of
manufacture. They possess, as yet, merely the virtual value of a
promissory-note, which passes current, because the bearer is assured
that he can, at pleasure, convert it into cash. Many gold mines, which
are well known, are not worked, because their whole produce would not
cover the incidental expenses; but the gold which they contain is, in
reality, the same with that of our coin; and yet no one would be foolish
enough to call it wealth, for there is no probability it will ever be
extracted from the mine, or purified; and, of course, it possesses no
value. The wild fowl becomes wealth the moment it is in the possession
of the sportsman; while those of the very same species, that have
escaped his attempts, remain without any title to the term.

It is further, without question, true, that all who do not possess
property in land must draw their subsistence from wages received,
directly or indirectly, from the proprietors, unless they violate all
rights, and become robbers. In this respect, every service is alike; the
most honourable and the most disgraceful receives each its wages. It is
certain, too, that if the circumstances determining the rate of the
various kinds of wages remain the same, that is if the offers of
service, and the demand, preserve the same proportion to each other,
after as well as before the imposition of a tax; then, of course, the
wages will continue at the same rate, and thus the tax, however imposed,
will uniformly, in the end, fall on that class in the community who
furnish the wages; so that they must suffer, either an addition to their
former expenses, or a retrenchment of those luxuries they enjoyed. And
according as the tax is less directly levied, the greater will be the
burden they are subjected to; for besides indemnifying all the other
classes who have advanced the tax-money, a further expense must be
incurred, in the additional number of persons now necessary to collect
it. The natural conclusion we must draw from the theory is, that a tax,
directly levied on the neat revenue of the land proprietors, is that
which agrees best with reason and justice, and that which bears lightest
on the contributors.

If, however, this theory should be found to throw entirely out of
consideration a multitude of circumstances, which possess a powerful
influence over the facility of collecting a tax, as well an over its
consequences; and if the general result of this influence be of far more
importance than the single advantage of a less burden; then the theory,
inasmuch as it neglects a part of those particulars which have their
weight in the practice, is contradicted by this last. And this is
exactly what happens in the question respecting the comparative
advantages and inconveniencies of the two modes of levying taxes.
